chore(docs): improve the readme (hopefully) (#1999)
winglang/wing: README.md

![Winglang Banner](./logo/banner.png)

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://docs.winglang.io/getting-started">Quick Start</a> •
  <a href="http://t.winglang.io/slack">Slack</a> •
  <a href="https://docs.winglang.io">Docs</a> •
  <a href="https://docs.winglang.io/status#roadmap">Roadmap</a> •
  <a href="https://docs.winglang.io/getting-started">Getting Started</a> •
  <a href="https://github.com/winglang/wing/issues">Issues</a> •
  <a href="https://github.com/winglang/wing/discussions">Discussions</a> •
  <a href="https://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/winglang">Stack Overflow</a> •
  <a href="https://docs.winglang.io/contributors/">Contribute</a>
</p>

> [![Short demo](./logo/demo.gif)](https://youtu.be/x0xfIoY5y6E)

Reviewer: The quality of this gif seems worse than the others, it has noticeable artifacts

Author: The more different details in the video the worst the quality it seems

Author: I found a way to increase quality a but, and together with more aggressive cropping I think it is much better now.
There are still a few artifacts at the beginning of the demo video, but they are because of VSC. I will see how to eliminate those in the next version I produce

# Welcome! :wave:

> **Wing** is a new open-source, statically-typed, [cloud-oriented programming language]. 

Author: The value I saw was to lower expectations from it, kind of the same purpose of saying its in Alpha. But since I'm moving that statement further up, I guess it is not really needed here..

It has [distributed computing primitives], a [resource system] that represents cloud services with their 2 different phases (configuration & runtime), and [other optimizations for cloud programming].

[![Same object - different interfaces](./logo/diff-interfaces.gif)](https://youtu.be/y7OGRC2f5gk)

## Compilation to Terraform and Javascript
Wing applications compile to Terraform and JavaScript that are ready to deploy
to your favorite cloud provider. Support for more provisioning engines and clouds is planned.

> Wing's [compiler plugins] can be used to customize the compilation output. For example, make all buckets that are exposed to the internet encrypted.

Author: yes, but the abstractions and std lib are part of what we call Wing, on?

> to your favorite cloud provider. Support for more provisioning engines and clouds is planned.
> Wing's [compiler plugins] can be used to customize the compilation output. For example, make all buckets that are exposed to the internet encrypted.

Reviewer: > Support for more provisioning engines and clouds is planned.

The implication of this sentence is that not all clouds are supported right now, which isn't completely true.

What about this? Or maybe just take out the sentence entirely, since I feel like this would fall under the "This is alpha" umbella.

```suggestion
to your favorite cloud provider. Support for more provisioning engines is planned.
Wing's [compiler plugins] can be used to customize the compilation output. For example, make all buckets that are exposed to the internet encrypted.
```

> Wing's [compiler plugins] can be used to customize the compilation output. For example, make all buckets that are exposed to the internet encrypted.

Author: Accepted the change

```js
// This line imports the standard library.
bring cloud;

// We are instantiating an abstract bucket here.
// At compile time, it will be substituted by the configured implementation for the target cloud.
let bucket = new cloud.Bucket();
```

Since the Wing compiler sees the entire application, including its infrastrucrure, it can also generate least privilege IAM policies based on intent, and other cloud mechanics.

```js
bring cloud;

// This code runs at compile time to provision the bucket.
let bucket = new cloud.Bucket();

// This code runs at compile time to provision the function.
new cloud.Function(inflight () => {
  // This code runs later, on other machines, and interacts with the provisioned bucket.
  // The compiler knows to generate the network topology and IAM policies needed for the function to be able to put
  // a file in the bucket. It also knows to capture the bucket at deployment time and pass the info that is needed
  // for the function to interact with it at runtime.
  bucket.put("hello.txt", "World!");
});
```

> ## Wing's creator

Author: Can you please explain what would the Q&A format look like?

> ## Wing's creator

Reviewer: ```md
### FAQ

#### Why a language?

...

#### Who created Wing?

...

```

While there are many developers [contributing](#contributors) to the project, it started with the vision of [Elad Ben-Israel], who is also the creator of the [AWS CDK].

[cloud-oriented programming language]: https://docs.winglang.io/#what-is-a-cloud-oriented-language
[distributed computing primitives]: https://docs.winglang.io/concepts/inflights
[resource system]: https://docs.winglang.io/concepts/resources
[other optimizations for cloud programming]: #main-features-that-make-wing-tailored-for-cloud-development
[compiler plugins]: https://docs.winglang.io/reference/compiler-plugins
[Elad Ben-Israel]: https://github.com/eladb
[AWS CDK]: https://github.com/aws/aws-cdk
[console]: https://docs.winglang.io/getting-started/console
[Standard library]: https://docs.winglang.io/reference/wingsdk-spec

> ## Why a language? (and not an SDK or platform)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Why a language? (and not a library or platform)
```

When people ask "the question", I feel like I usually hear "library" used instead of SDK. Not sure I necessarily agree, but this question should match what people ask.

We believe that the cloud is a new kind of computer that requires a [new programming paradigm](https://docs.winglang.io/#what-is-a-cloud-oriented-language) to fully utilize it.

While it is possible to use this new paradigm with existing languages, we believe that a language that natively supports it will take it to the next level, in a way that is impossible to accomplish with existing ones.

> Inflight functions and resources are a great example. We believe it is impossible to ensure this level of isolation and interaction semantics in existing languages through a library, or even through a compiler extension. We've seen some worthy efforts in projects like [Pulumi's Function Serialization](https://www.pulumi.com/docs/intro/concepts/function-serialization/), [Punchcard](https://github.com/sam-goodwin/punchcard) and [Functionless](https://functionless.org/), and in all of these cases, there are either compromises in safety (e.g. it is possible to capture mutable objects) or in the programming model (e.g. type system is too complex).

Reviewer: Should we try to always treat `inflight` like a keyword?

```suggestion
`inflight` functions and resources are a great example. We believe it is impossible to ensure this level of isolation and interaction semantics in existing languages through a library, or even through a compiler extension. We've seen some worthy efforts in projects like [Pulumi's Function Serialization](https://www.pulumi.com/docs/intro/concepts/function-serialization/), [Punchcard](https://github.com/sam-goodwin/punchcard) and [Functionless](https://functionless.org/), and in all of these cases, there are either compromises in safety (e.g. it is possible to capture mutable objects) or in the programming model (e.g. type system is too complex).
```

Reviewer: Also I'm not sure we should bother mentioning punchcard here, since functionless is a pretty direct evolution of it

Author: > Should we try to always treat inflight like a keyword?

I think so, yes.

3. [Distributed computing primitives](https://docs.winglang.io/concepts/inflights).
    - [Default immutability](https://docs.winglang.io/blog/2023/02/02/good-cognitive-friction#immutable-by-default).
    - [Implicit async](https://docs.winglang.io/reference/spec#113-asynchronous-model), explicit defer.
4. [Compiler plugins](https://docs.winglang.io/reference/compiler-plugins) that can be used to customize the compilation output, such as infrastructure definitions.
5. [JavaScript interoperability](https://docs.winglang.io/reference/spec#5-interoperability).
6. Automatic generation of IAM policies and other cloud mechanics based on intent.
7. [Native JSON support](https://docs.winglang.io/reference/spec#114-json-type).
8. More in the [spec](https://docs.winglang.io/reference/spec).

## What does the development flow look like with Wing
1. Write code that targets an abstract cloud.
2. Visualize, test, and interact with it using the Wing console and its instant hot reloading.
3. Compile to JS and Terraform, targeting the desired cloud and provisioning engine.
4. Deploy and manage with your existing tools.

[![Short demo](./logo/demo.gif)](https://youtu.be/x0xfIoY5y6E)

> ## Is there a company behind Wing / what is the business model

Reviewer: Maybe there is a way to frame this like "How is wing being developed and how will it be supported in the future"? That way it can (hopefully) help with confidence in the future of wing.

Author: Hmm.. maybe, but the reason I put the business model question bluntly here is because you said it's on people's minds (and also we get external feedback this is true). I wanted to tackle this head-on.
Why do you want to make it more subtle?

Author: I will improve with Elad in the next iteration (or take Chris's version)

> Monada Inc. is leading the development of Winglang.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Monada](https://monada.co) is leading the development of Winglang.
```

idk if there is a legal reason to include "inc" but I would avoid if possible, it's a bad vibe

Author: I think it can be removed.
The reason I didn't add a link to monada's website is because it will soon redirect to winglang's website, but I guess we can figure out what to do with it then..

The language and local simulator will always remain open-source and free to use, with plans to eventually contribute them to a dedicated foundation.
Monada's business model is planned around connecting the Wing console to production applications and charging for the enhanced management and observability experience it will provide. Use of the console for development will always remain free.

By choosing this approach, Monada aligns its interests with those of the community, incentivizing itself to actively support the Wing ecosystem. As Wing usage increases, it creates a potential user base for the production console's monetizable management and observability features, which are reliant on the managed app's code being written in Wing.

Since Wing is compiled to Javascript and Terraform, developers will always be able to continue to use their existing management and observability solutions with it. We believe that because the Wing compiler sees the "entire picture" of the application, a management console that taps into that knowledge can offer very competitive features. As the compiler is open-source, other companies will be able to offer competing consoles with the same features.

> ## This is Alpha

Reviewer: imo this section should stay high up on the readme
